---
layout: post
title:  "Reflection during the finals"
date:   2023-12-12 19:44:36 -0800
categories: journal
---

Now I'm kinda lost if I'm being completely honest. I sometimes just feel my heart pounding fast and a lot of stress because of the exams. That feeling can paralyze me. And I guess I have a relatively narrow social support network.

After long deliberation, I think I might actually consider consulting as my career. I'm considering management consulting or engineering consulting. I think I'll enjoy it because I LOVE talking to people. Some people are introverted or ambivert and I'm just the polar opposite. Talking energizes me. I pride myself on thinking of something funny to entertain my clients or something substantial to rebut my debating opponent. And talking to friends and acquaintances alike too. I almost feel a clear pattern where my happiness is completely hinged on whether or not I'm talking to anybody at that moment. I think going into consulting, or just business in general will ughhh help with my mental health.

I love teamwork. I love team collaboration. I love incorporating information from different people and processing it to "spit it out." I love interaction, whether they're "recreational" like with friends, "functional" like with clients, or even "adversarial" like with people on the other debating team.

I also think that I can be a little bit uptight sometimes. Partly because I was never fully immersed in either kind of culture, i.e., Chinese upper-middle class or "Western" (Canadian whatever class). Perhaps I was a bit in the Chinese one. But definitely not in the Canadian one. I always get confused when people use some internet slang that is just completely beyond what I know. Like what is "jk" really? "Jk" for "just kidding"? What is "ngl" really? I'm confounded. And vice versa. I wish   I could just have a vocabulary of proto-Germanic and Anglo-Saxon English words and slang only. I wish I could just "fit in" whatever social group I should belong yk (now I'm using it).

Yep, social identity is a pretty complicated topic. Looking around, my limited number of friends, maybe four close ones in Australia and two in Canada, with some spread out in China. Are they satisfied? I can't say for sure. It might be just an illusion, after all, that everyone is more successful than I am. Surely that's not true. No one can say for sure that they have "figured out" completely who they really are. And for someone, e.g., coming from a white rural town to the University of a Billion Chinese, or for someone coming from a Filipino-dominant suburb, UBC would be quite a shock. And they survived. A lot of my friends, who I know fairly well, survived. Despite not being either East Asian or white, or being comfortably upper-middle class, or being associated with any of the dominant social groups. I've only gotten half a year after I arrived in Canada. Surely I'll figure it out.

And it's not even an end goal to figure it out, right? Like you're not trying to reach for something. It's an ongoing process, forever running, changing ever so slightly when you open your eyes in bed and sign why Canada is so cold. Even if you're well established in one community now, things will change rapidly when you move. Like with all the people who moved from Vancouver island to UBC for school or all the people from the middle of nowhere outside BC moving to Vancouver for the first time. Change is inevitable. It's exciting actually. Think about the opportunity cost you have to bear if you elect to stay where you comfortably are. I am actually more than glad to say that I made the right choice to transfer from an Australian university to UBC. I basically had to start from scratch. But it was so much fun with so much novelty. I experienced things I never thought I would. Going on a hike? In Sydney, no thank you. Try sailing? Crazy expensive in Sydney no thank you. Try singing? Oops, there isn't such a thing in Sydney. Try political science or economics? Not possible under the stringent curriculum in Sydney. All the new experiences just came rushing in, overwhelming me. But it was a good kind of overwhelm.

I found Canadians far nicer than Australians because quite a few Australians have expressed their covert racist views in private to me. Which is shocking. Gosh, you're a middle-class Australian studying at the most prestigious university in Australia. One could safely argue that you're well-educated. But wow! Still! There are a lot of desirable qualities that I associate Canada with. Weirdly, for the first time in my life, this feels like a country that I care about. A country where I can settle down and build a life. A country that is not expendable, fungible, or disposable. The pain of the overwhelming new experience outweighs the costs. I even have more luck having more dates on Hinge! As an Asian gay. And situtationships.

What do I do next? Well, let's first look at the exams. The first exam that I'll have is on Wednesday. I don't think it'll benefit me to take a deferred exam, so I'm willing to face the challenge head-on. I also think it's important to keep my dream in mind. I want to be in management consulting, for now. Keep that in mind when I'm prepping for the exams.

My other priorities? First, what kind of Asian am I? What kind of gay am I? What kind of Chinese am I? Am I Canadian? Am I white-washed? Am I acting straight? Did I give enough back to my community? Such questions that a white cis-gender straight middle-class kid from North Van studying Arts might never face. Well, I gladly accept the challenge. I was born this way. And I'm blessed, not trying to draw a religious reference here, by God to have these qualities. I have more compassion; I care more about disadvantaged groups; I care more about social inequality; I care more about mental health issues; I care more about good governance (because I was born and raised in authoritarian China y'all); I care more about social justice. That's a privilege that I was endowed with, along with all other unfortunate people. And I am also fortunate to be pursuing a pretty useful social science and computer science degree. So I have an educational background. I think it is almost a moral duty to make the world better and prioritize the general social good.

But does all that make me un-Chinese? I don't like showing off wealth; I don't like math much; I probably accept more Western ideologies than my Chinese peers. And as someone who went through the GAOKAO system in high school, I'm writing this freaking diary using freaking English not Chinese! Well, I guess, identities are never that easy right? I'm talking about intersectionality. In China, I'm gay and Chinese and upper-middle class. In Canada, I'm gay and Asian and a poor international student who's worrying about his future. Even within China, there are geeks, social butterflies etc etc. Even within my high school, my very Chinese high school, there are people at every place on the political spectrum, people who eat junk food every day or salad every day, people who love math and who hate it to death. It's never quite easy, right? That's why we don't like the word "stereotype." It wipes out individuality (sorry for being so Western-washed here). It eliminates diversity. It's treating everyone as a thin piece of paper containing the most basic stats. It's reducing and dehumanizing. Two of my Asian friends would love *Avatar: The Last Airbender* to Death, while another one and I thought they meant the Cameron movie. It's different. But it's fun. It's what makes us special. Well if a cloning company can produce a million clones of the same attributes, what fun do we have? As humans, we're seeking for novelty as well as belonging. Diversity is important.

Am I too white? That's a question I would ask myself when so many people of Asian descent I know exhibit some stereotypical Asian behaviors. I don't watch anime and I read *The Economist* for fun because I used to do poli sci. I watch *The Newsroom* and I read books. I feel that I'm being weirded out or I'm weirding other people out whenever I mention that I like classical music! Why can't I just be a **normal** Asian Canadian who likes anime, plays LOL with friends on the weekends, and excels at math and computer science, eying for the next software developer job at Google? Or is that **normal**, or just a **statistically significant majority?** Do I conform? Do genuinely like poli sci and econ, being gay, liking classical music, cohere with being Asian?

It's always hard if you're in the minority. Next course of action? First, if the percentage of the "tribe", then increasing the base will do. Join clubs, especially big clubs. Second, having multiple groups of friends to side with each of the identities.

We're in a perpetual struggle to know ourselves. Know thyself, as whatever wise philosopher that I don't care for might say, is important. A life unexamined is not worth living. Being able to articulate my priorities is important. Hopefully, in god's good time, we might be just one inch closer to getting some more clarity in life.
