---
layout: post
title:  "Reflection after the New Year — On Digital Addiction, Friendships, Life Goals, Music and More"
date:   2024-01-03 13:41:04 -0800
categories: journal
tags: #phone addiction #Internet #Life Goal #Calling #Vocation #Max Weber #Philosophy #Viktor Frankl #Flow #Mihaly Czikszentmihalyi #life 
---

It’s January 3rd today. I’m listening to Rachmaninov’s Symphony No.2 while writing this. It’s been quite a while. I’ll admit that I had my fair share of TV Shows addiction for the past three days during the holidays. It does get me wonder though. I have been feeling more and more extroverted since I got to UBC. But there’s always this undercurrent of dissatisfaction when I’m not talking to my friends. Basically, a roller coaster ride where the time of conversations is the climax, and deep down lies the alone time. Sometimes I think I must be terrified of being by myself.

I watched the movie *Maestro* with a friend last December when it first came out. There was a line that struck me: Leonard Bernstein kept the door open even when he was writing and composing for fear of being alone. He had this flashy, big character and constantly required people’s company to keep him fulfilled. Am I in the same shoe as Berstein?

Or is it the case that being by myself is not the problem, but doing nothing. I’ve read Mihaly’s seminal work *Flow: the Optimal Experience* years ago in middle school in which he proposed a state of “Universal Flow”. Ericsson concurs by advocating for a “deliberate practice” in life. Victor wanted to find a life of meaning. Max Weber argues for a *calling*, a *vocation*. I know all these are clichéd and only a bunch of New York Times’s self-help bestsellers. But all these seem terribly American Protestant, the most extreme form of which results in people being workaholics and not taking vacations.

But can we feel truly content in simply living a life of leisure? A life of more recreation than creation, more lax schedules than tight deadlines? *The Atlantic* has a wonderful podcast exploring the relationship between humans and time. Wouldn’t it be nice to just spend an afternoon doing nothing? 

But also the problem with social class. At least in some cases, the more privileged a person is, the more regimented, perhaps, a person’s schedule is. Waking up at 7 am, school, then piano, Latin, sports, then debating, then before-bed regimen. It’s the scenarios in some American and British upper-middle households especially true for some anxious Californian (just kidding) parents. In the book the *9.9 Percent: the American Miseducation*, XYZ explained how the top 10% of the American families are putting in yet even more resources to help their kids succeed. There is almost this malaise of *stillness* in the air. The dissatisfaction from *not doing stuff*. The dissatisfaction from *not following goals*. But I’m giving you, the reader, some questions that I myself, along with perhaps all the philosophers, can’t answer. 

The ultimate set of questions: is a life goal necessary? If not, how can we justify the god-given consciousness and intelligence that God endow us with. Look at rats, pigs, horses, and even dogs and cats. These domesticated animals *are domesticated to us*. Hence, by the hierarchy, we might be able to say that we are *superior* to these domesticated animals. Please don’t call animal control, as I’m only referring to the hierarchy in the sense of intelligence and *drive*.

But things are even more problematic if we say a life goal is necessary. Then what should it be? Humans are the product of information both from *outside* and from *inside*. There are several questions: first, where does this all begin? Can we say that humans are born with some level of randomness that even God can’t control, the exact randomness that decides the *inside* element of humans? Then by the interaction between the *inside* randomness and the outside world, humans are able to evolve on their own to develop their own consciousness.

I would like to propose a framework of two kinds of *hierarchy*. *Hierarchy A* is the relationship between humans and the natural randomness. Maybe it’s the God. *Hierarchy B* is the relationship between humans in inferior and superior social stations. It’s commonplace whenever there is a boss and an employee. Or like teachers and students. Parents and children.

Because I didn’t study religions, I can’t discuss *hierarchy A* much. What I can know for sure is that whatever *A* is, it is entrenched in our psyche and cannot be rid of. Any discussion on this matter is perhaps futile. My attention now turns to *hierarchy B*. I believe the concept of *power* lies in the heart of the issue. Defined in political science, *power* is the ability to make other people do things that they would otherwise not do or not inclined to do. In real-life social interactions, *hierarchy B* is present in these examples: the State imposes a communication restriction on what can be posted; parents taking kids’ iPad away when they found that their kids were watching porn; the court imposes a gag order on an individual; etc. I argue that here, *hierarchy B* plays a part in determine the development of the inferior party by imposing on it some agenda of the superior party.

I guess, at this point, I accept provincially that humans do need a *calling*, a *vocation*, or a *life goal*. By the tradition of many philosophers whose favorite hobby is to confuse people, I now call it *zhi* (志 in Chinese). I’ll try to justify this using modern psychology. By the principle of *hierarchy A*, I assume that by the evolutionary instincts, humans’ first essential need is to *protect* and to *entertain* itself. *Protecting* is obvious. Less so is *entertaining* oneself. I plan to tackle this problem using psychology.

I suppose everyone’s biggest goal in life is to find one’s happiness, whatever form it may take. It is the run-of-the-mill kind of career achievements, winning a sports game, talking to friends, or even having sex. This is individualistic at its core, and for good reasons. In this world, what I can really know is me. What’s within me will always be within me. Matters outside of my body are subject to a different law. It does not exactly make much sense to care about someone when that person might only be a mental illusion. I can only know that *I* is real.

Having justified the individualistic core, I rebut some of the counter arguments. Some might argue, for example, that personal sacrifice for the country or the community is called for to maintain overall societal “harmony”.  I rebut this in two ways. The first way is that by my definition, when the person is choose to lay its body before the tank for the “greater good”, the person’s consciousness has been configured in a such a way. In fact, if one’s ideal of life is to sacrifice for others, then letting the person die precisely fulfills his individual definition of happiness. Also, that argument is deeply socialistic, top-down, and centralized. I side with John Stuart Mill and Adam Smith. With efficient communication among parties, millions of individuals can coalesce into an *emergence* to fight for everyone’s best interest. And when everyone’s best interest is satisfied, by JS Mill, the overall society is the happiest.

At this point, I have justified the argument that the best thing one person can do is to pursue its happiness. I guess the answer would be quite simple: find the things that make you the happiest. Be a prudent economist and choose the path accordingly.

There are, however, some morality principles left unanswered. And although I haven’t read Ayn Rand, this essay sounds quite *”Rand*y”. I guess after a few weeks, I will come back to this essay and finish my thoughts.

Maybe the popularity of Ayn Rand in her time was the product of disillusionment with the society as a whole. The distrust in the *collectivity* that the “big corps” and “big govts” are up to no good. To that I have no answers for now.
